pascual@umich.edu

Dear Pr. Pascual,

Thank you very much to give us an opportunity to re-submit our manuscript. Your detailed comments on our previous work helped us a lot to clarify our manuscript and to address the various points raised by the reviewers.

We agree that we had taken too literally Koelle et al. (2006) suggestion of the serial SIR model. We have thus rewritten the manuscript and the reviewer answers without confrontational approach.
As you suggested we now seek to determine whether a serial SIR model would require gradual antigenic drift within clusters.

We have also added some materials: 

-We have added the widely used model of Gupta et. al. (1998) to broader the generality of our conclusion concerning the specificity of the status based model with reduced infectivity assumption.

-We have developed a new modem to show that including within cluster antigenic drift (independently of the formulation used to describe it) can turn the epidemic fadeout that follows the invasion of a mutant cluster into the replacement of a previous circulating antigenic cluster. 

-As a last point, we have also performed additional simulations to address reviewer #2 comment on the importance of stochasticity within population of 1-2 millions of hosts.

We hope that this entirely revised version of our manuscript now address the points raised by the reviewer.

We look forward to hearing your opinion,

Sincerely yours,

Sébastien Ballesteros


2009/5/22 Mercedes Pascual 1 <pascual@umich.edu>

   Dear Sebastien,

   I have read your replies to the referees’ comments and the revised
   manuscript. I would be willing to consider a resubmission of a
   further revised paper mainly because I find your arguments on the
   criticisms of referee 3 convincing and I believe that the comments
   of referees 1 and 2 can be largely addressed with modifications of
   the text.

   Because I would send the manuscript back to the same referees, it is
   important however that the resubmission convincingly addresses the
   comments of all referees. I do not believe that the revised
   manuscript in its current form will substantially change the
   criticisms of referee 1. The main problem will be the current focus
   of the paper on criticizing the ability of a sequential SIR as a
   minimal model of influenza. The referee correctly interpreted the
   paper by Koelle et al. (2006) in pointing out that the paper
   recognizes and does not exclude the occurrence of some loss of
   immunity within clusters. He/she points out in the review of your
   paper the several places in Koelle’s paper where this is stated. You
   have over-interpreted what was meant by a sequential SIR: what
   Koelle et al. (2006) meant to emphasize with this was the need for a
   model that concatenates sequentially the typical compartmental
   structure used in epidemiological models, instead of using a
   continuous SIRS formulation. The use of the SIRS or the SIR
   structure in this sequential formulation was not the main
   consideration (SIR was used to refer to the general structure of
   compartmental models); the emphasis was on “sequential”. I know this
   as a co-author of that paper.

   Having said this, I still believe that your exploration and results
   on the importance of the loss of immunity within clusters are
   interesting and worthwhile. What is problematic is the way you
   motivate it by over-emphasizing a point in Koelle at al. (2006) that
   you interpreted too literally and that was not meant the way you
   present it. I suggest you change the text to reflect this and to
   take a less confrontational approach to motivate the paper: I say
   this not as an author of that paper but as an editor considering the
   comments of referee 1. Your replies to this referee in their current
   form are unlikely to change his/her recommendation. A much more
   convincing argument would be made by using Koelle et al. (2006) to
   motivate the question of whether a sequential compartmental model
   would require the loss of immunity within clusters.

   In relation to this point, I find the argument in the Discussion
   that cluster replacements may be “overrated” also somewhat extreme.
   The evidence on this is not that clear. For example, the papers on
   sink-source dynamics do not rule out cluster replacements. These
   could happen in the source, as a result of the strong selection you
   mention. The data analyzed by Russell et al. correspond to a period
   of time during which there was no emergence of a new cluster. Recker
   et al., in my interpretation of their work, gives a different
   mechanism for cluster replacement that involves only the ecological
   (and not the evolutionary) dynamics. The clusters appear in patterns
   of recurrent replacements because of the low dimensionality of
   phenotypic space. It is not clear what this has to say about the
   replacements being an artifact. The paper by Sih does not really
   present an analysis that is more powerful. It is an analysis with
   its own drawbacks. The point I am trying to make is that the writing
   of this section is a bit extreme and that there is no need to
   present your results in this black and white manner, the occurrence
   of punctuated cluster replacements is not incompatible with the loss
   of immunity within clusters.

   To summarize, I think that the paper would be more convincing by
   posing the question of the importance of this mechanism without
   making it an either-or question, and without taking such a
   confrontational position. Yes, your results raise the question of
   whether the results of Koelle et al. (2006) are strongly dependent
   on the choice of a status-based formulation and this is a valuable
   point. But I do not see how your results show that the progressive
   loss of immunity within clusters invalidates the occurrence of
   cluster replacements.

   With regard to the replies to referee 2, it would be useful to
   consider if there is a way, at least in the Discussion, if not by
   some additional work, to more fully address his/her comment on the
   role of stochasticity in smaller populations. My interpretation of
   this point was that he/she was interested in how a smaller
   population size in a metapopulation context could affect your
   results on coexistence/cluster replacements. I realize it would
   possibly be another study to fully address this point but it may be
   useful to touch on it in the Discussion in response to the referee’s
   comment.

   If you can revise both the text and the referee’s responses taking
   into consideration the above suggestions, I will be willing to
   consider a resubmission.

   MERCEDES
   -------------------------------
   Mercedes Pascual
   EEB, University of Michigan
   and
   Howard Hughes Medical Institute
   --------------------------------------------------------------------


   Quoting sebastien ballesteros <sebastien.ballesteros@gmail.com
   <mailto:sebastien.ballesteros@gmail.com>>:

       Dear Pr. Pascual,

       We would like to ask you an opportunity for a resubmission of our
       manuscript 09-PLCB-RA-0159 "Impact of punctuated immune escape
       on the
       recurrent dynamics of inﬂuenza A".

       We fear that the negative comments of reviewer #3 strongly devalued
       our work since they call into question our ability to draw
       conclusions
       from our study. However, reviewer #3 comments were irrelevant as
       he/she misinterpreted the rational basis of the models used in the
       manuscript as well as the implication of the discussed assumptions.

       By contrast, we have appreciated the constructive reports of
       reviewers
       #1 and #2, but we claim that their points were mostly due to
       the fact that the previously submitted version of our manuscript was
       not easy to read in places, which might have induced some
       difficulties
       in interpreting our results.

       Hereby, you will find an entirely revised version of the manuscript
       and detailed answers to the reviewers comments.

       We hope that in view of this thoroughly revised version of our
       manuscript, you will share our opinion that its theoretical
       developments as well as its biological implication deserve
       publication
       in PLoS Computational Biology

       We look forward to hearing your opinion,

       Sincerely yours,

       Sébastien Ballesteros





       ploscompbiol@plos.org <mailto:ploscompbiol@plos.org> a écrit :

           Dear Dr. Ballesteros,

           Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Impact
           of punctuated immune escape on the recurrent dynamics of
           inﬂuenza A" for review by PLoS Computational Biology. As
           with all papers submitted to the journal, yours was fully
           evaluated by myself in consultation with the PLoS
           Computational Biology Editorial Team. In this case, your
           article was also evaluated by 3 independent reviewers. The
           reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic,
           but they raised substantial concerns about the paper. Based
           on the reviews, I regret that we will not be able to accept
           this manuscript for publication in the journal.

           The reviews are attached, and we hope they may help you
           should you decide to revise the manuscript for submission
           elsewhere. I am sorry that we cannot be more positive on
           this occasion, but hope that you appreciate the reasons for
           this decision and that you will consider PLoS Computational
           Biology for other submissions in the future.

           Thank you again for your support of PLoS Computational
           Biology and open access publishing. Please don't hesitate to
           get in touch if I can provide any further assistance.


           Sincerely,

           Mercedes Pascual
           Associate Editor
           PLoS Computational Biology


           Sebastian Bonhoeffer
           Deputy Editor
           PLoS Computational Biology

           ------------------------------------------------------------------------

           Reviewer #1 (Remarks for the Author):

           Ballesteros and colleagues consider the invasion dynamics of
           a novel antigenic cluster into a population with a resident
           antigenic cluster under four different modeling frameworks:
           a status-based reduced infectivity model (SBRI), a
           status-based reduced susceptibility model, a history-based
           reduced susceptibility model, and a history-based reduced
           infectivity model. They numerically simulate (both
           deterministically (fig 3+4) and stochastically (fig 6 + 7))
           the transient invasion dynamics under these four models and
           use these simulation results to show the peak in incidence
           of the incoming antigenic cluster (Fig 2) and the extinction
           times of the resident and invading cluster (Fig 5). The main
           points of their manuscript are 1) that compared to the other
           three models, the SBRI model results in significantly
           different population dynamics and replacement dynamics, and
           is therefore problematic, and 2) that a serial SIR model
           cannot give reasonable dynamics for flu and that gradual
           antigenic evolution therefore plays a critical for the virus
           and that punctuated evolution therefore cannot be the main
           driver of influenza A evolution.

           I have several major concerns about this manuscript, and a
           few more moderate concerns, both of which I detail below.

           Major concerns:

           I. Regarding the authors' first main point, I am not
           convinced from the figures provided that the SBRI model is
           significantly different from the other three models. The
           authors do nicely show in Table 2 that the invading strain's
           R0 (which is not really R0, but really more of a net
           reproductive rate R) is different from the other three
           models. However, in Figure 2, both the SBRI model and the
           SBRS model are unique in their invasion dynamics- it's not
           just the SBRI model that differs from the other three. More
           importantly, the model-specific subplots shown in Figures 5,
           6, 10 all seem to show a striking similarity to one another,
           in contrast to what is argued by the authors.

           II. Regarding the authors' second main point, the authors
           adamantly argue against the role of epochal evolution in flu
           evolution (Koelle et al. Science 2006). However, Koelle et
           al. repeatedly mention that weak positive selection (brought
           about by incomplete immunity within antigenic clusters)
           plays a pivotal role in generating the epidemiological and
           evolutionary dynamics of flu. Examples include:

           'The replenishment of susceptible hosts comes from a
           combination of new births and the slight antigenic evolution
           of the strains that compose the cluster.' (p. 1901).

           'Our model indicates that weak within-cluster selection and
           the selective sweeps that accompany cluster transitions are
           sufficient.' (p. 1902)

           'The invasion of the new cluster is facilitated by the
           accumulated diversity of the old cluster: The novel
           antigenic cluster can have up to 80% cross-immunity with
           strain variants of the old cluster that share four out of
           five of its epitopes; however, it has only 52%
           cross-immunity with strain variants of the old cluster that
           differ slightly in four out of five of the epitopes.' (p.
           1902). By looking at the legend of figure 2 and considering
           the provided parameter values of this paper, it can easily
           be computed that sequences within a single antigenic cluster
           have 65-100% cross-immunity with one another, while
           sequences belonging to adjacent clusters have 52-80%
           cross-immunity with one another. Sequences within a single
           cluster can therefore have lower cross-immunity than
           sequences from two different clusters, consistent with what
           Ballesteros and coauthors argue with the reference to Shih's
           work ("antigenic distance of two isolates within a cluster
           can be considerably larger than
           that between two isolates from two adjacent clusters" - p.
           18 of manuscript)

           Koelle et al. therefore acknowledge the role that gradual
           antigenic evolution within antigenic clusters plays in
           driving the dynamics of flu. What Ballesteros et al. argue
           in their manuscript is therefore not particularly novel: "a
           faster rate of susceptibles renewal that the one assumed by
           birth and death processes is clearly needed to reproduce
           influenza A recurrent dynamics. Gradual antigenic drift can
           offer such a high rate of susceptibles renewal." (p. 19)

           At the very least, integrating into the current manuscript a
           fair description of the epochal evolution model should be done.

           III. My third major concern is the overlap in ideas between
           this manuscript and the Gökaydin et al. (2006) Interface
           paper. The analysis presented here is in structure very
           similar to the one presented in Gökaydin et al.: they talk
           about antigenic drift vs. shift in terms of the level of
           cross-immunity between clusters, they consider both
           deterministic and stochastic simulations, and their
           simulations including sensitivity analysis are essentially
           the same. However, there is only a single nominal reference
           to Gökaydin in this manuscript, at a point where the authors
           mention that parameter values are consistent with the
           parameter values used in theoretical papers. The current
           work should be considered in the context of this previous
           work, not as a novel set of analyses. Also, given this
           similarity, the computational work presented here, although
           thorough, is not particularly novel.

           IV. I am concerned about the dependence of the results on
           the threshold used for the deterministic simulations and on
           the population size used for the stochastic simulations. The
           conclusions stated here are that antigenic cluster
           replacement critically depends on model assumptions (SBRI
           vs. the other models), yet it seems that this conclusion in
           turn really critically depends on the threshold and
           population size modeling assumptions used.

           More moderate concerns:

           I. I am concerned about the assumption that the resident
           cluster is at equilibrium. Clusters persist on average for
           3-4 years, so the ability of a novel cluster to replace a
           resident cluster may also depend on the clusters before then.

           II. The authors state in the discussion that gradual
           antigenic drift does not exclude punctuated discrete jumps
           in antigenic properties nor does it invalidate the
           possibility of selective sweeps (p. 19). Yet the authors
           then state on p.21 that 'epochal evolution cannot be the
           dominant road of influenza A main antigen evolution'. This
           seems to me to be sending mixed messages. I agree with the
           statement of p.19, but why can't epochal evolution (of
           course with imperfect within-cluster immunity) be the
           dominant road of flu A antigen evolution if selective sweeps
           are the critical process limiting viral HA diversity?


           In sum, the analyses presented in this manuscript are
           mathematically very thorough, the manuscript very clearly
           organized and well-written, but the main two points made by
           the authors do not appear to be sufficiently well-supported
           (point 1) or novel (point 2).



           Reviewer #2 (Remarks for the Author):

           I find the topic of this paper very interesting and the
           authors have clearly invested a great deal of time and
           effort in this paper. Unfortunately, as a manuscript, I
           think it suffers from a few serious problems. My concerns
           are broadly categorized into issues relating to (i) the
           presentation and (ii) the content.

           (i) The presentation
           o I suggest the authors substantially revise the paper. In
           this revision, I think they need to consider making the text
           more concise and punchy, with a clearer logical flow. At
           present, the text is hard work to read, in part because the
           introduction is too long and meandering, there are too many
           asides, too much tangentially relevant background
           information is presented and there is a lack of focus at times.

           o I question whether all the figures contribute meaningfully
           to this story. Some of them are also unnecessarily cluttered
           and complicated.

           o Ultimately, the paper is sufficiently convoluted that it
           is difficult to conclude what the main objective of the
           authors might be. The aim of identifying a minimal theory of
           influenza A
           evolution in humans is important and laudable but it isn't
           being made clearly enough in this paper.

           (ii) The content (in no particular order)
           o There seems to be a hard-wired problem with the
           history-based model as presented in equations (3). [This was
           also the case with Kamo & Sasaki's presentation of their
           model.] The problem has to do with the duration of the
           infectious periods for individuals who are co-infected with
           both clusters. Given that no assumption is made about
           immunological interaction resulting from simultaneous
           infections, the average period of time spent in the two
           infectious classes (eg, SI and II) should not be affected
           and should be given by 1/(mu+nu). In the formulation
           presented on page 10, the infectious period for individuals
           experiencing single or double infection is clearly
           different. The authors may argue that the fraction of the
           population in the II class is so small that this error will
           have negligible effects, but I think the model should not
           contain inherent pathologies.

           o The authors mention they use the Gillespie algorithm, but
           it's not clear whether they mean Gillespie's direct method
           or first reaction method?

           o I appreciate the authors' attempt to investigate model
           predictions using empirically-derived parameter values, but
           table 1 gives no information as to their empirical source.
           Neither does it mention the credible ranges.

           o The stochastic simulations assume a population size of 10
           million. I wonder if the authors have looked at the case
           when N is closer to 1 million? The results of Kamo & Sasaki
           (2002), among others, has shown that in multi-strain models,
           noise and induce temporal asynchrony in oscillations and
           potentially facilitate coexistence.

           o The state variables in the mean field models are presented
           as proportions, so that it is difficult to gauge whether the
           stochastic model assumes frequency- or density-dependent
           transmission? Does this assumption affect the results?

           o I have been agonising over the use of \sigma as a measure
           drift/shift. In the end, while I appreciate the authors'
           comment that they are dealing with phenotypes, I don't think
           this assumption sits comfortably with me. I can't help
           thinking that potentially significant issues of time scale
           are being ignored, though I am open to being convinced
           otherwise.


           Reviewer #3 (Remarks for the Author):

           Review of "Impact of punctuated immune escape on the recurrent
           dynamics of influenza A" by S Ballesteros et al, submitted
           to PLOS Comp Biol

           The paper is concerned with modelling the dynamics of
           drifting influenza
           and in particular with the importance of the exact
           epidemiological nature of
           cross-immunity. The core of the work consists of an analysis
           of three
           SIR-type epidemic models each describing the interaction of
           two strain
           clusters. One strain cluster is assumed to be at its
           (endemic) equilibrium
           and the authors then investigate invasion conditions for the
           other cluster.

           The three models arise by studying the assumption that
           cross-immunity
           affects either infectivity or susceptibility and that
           cross-immunity is either
           polarized (status based) or gradual (history based).
           For the history based formulation susceptibility and
           infectivity reduction is
           combined in a single model. The authors then find that their
           model with
           polarized immunity and infectivity reduction exhibits
           significantly different
           dynamics than the other two/three models. In particular
           invasion is
           likely to drive the resident cluster to extinction in the
           polarized infectivity
           reduction model but not in the other models. The robustness
           of this
           observation is then documented in several ways. The main
           conclusion is that
           polarized-infectivity reduction can reproduce the observed
           influenza drift
           dynamics without invoking the assumption of punctuated flu
           drift.

           I believe that the authors observation is based on a rather
           simple
           misunderstanding as it is due to another phenomenon than
           what the authors
           claim. The way the authors model the interesting case of
           polarized reduced
           infectivity differs fundamentally from the other two models.
           In the polarized
           reduced infectivity model, individuals
           that have been infected with cluster 1 may enhance their
           immunity to
           cluster 2 by repeated infections with cluster 1. I am
           referring to
           the terms -beta_1R_iI1+(1-sigma)R_1I1 in the second line of
           eqn (2) page
           9 and a similar term in line 3. The same term is missing in
           model (1)
           but could in fact be put in. Would model (1) give similar
           results if the
           term was put in and would your conclusions about model (2)
           hold if the
           terms was removed? I think the answers are YES to the first
           question and
           NO to the second question. So the phenomenon
           responsible for the unusual invasion condition is in fact
           the assumption
           that reinfection within a cluster enhances cross-protection
           against the
           invading cluster, a kind of immunity-boosting effect. The
           authors themselves
           seems to have some idea about the problem in their
           discussion (lines 373-399).
           But basically I don't believe that it is a scaling issue.
           The fundamental
           assumptions are different.The way I would interpret model
           (2) (and the other models if the same
           phenomenon were to be incorporated) is as follows. The
           resident type
           is not just one strain but a cluster of closely related
           strains that can
           reinfect with out causing severe disease or infectivity. The
           invading type
           is another cluster somewhat remote in "antigen space". The
           finding is
           then that transmissions from one
           cluster to the other will often cause the extinction of the
           resident
           cluster. With this interpretation the present manuscript
           provides
           a very elegant analytical representation of the model of
           Koelle et al.
           It would make a nice paper in Theor Popul Biol or J Theor
           Biol but I don't
           think the results would be of sufficiently general interest
           to belong in
           PLOS.

           So I recommend that the paper be rejected: the authors
           attribute the observed
           phenomenon to the wrong biological mechanism; and to the
           extend that
           the model is applicable to influenza it seems to support
           exactly the opposite
           conclusion of the one the authors claim.

           PS The introduction provides a very good review of the
           theoretical flu
           literature. A couple of minor comments:

           line 20-23. When I read this I first thought that it was the
           complexity
           reduction that was your argument for choosing the status
           based infectivity
           reduction.

           line 71. Where in the Gog & Grenfell paper do you find the
           notion of
           punctuated evolution?

           several places: The reduction in model complexity may be
           achieved in
           both the history and the status based model for the case of
           infectivity
           reduction and also for susceptibility reduction in the case
           of polarized
           immunity. The observation is originally due to Gupta et al.
           (1998)
           The topic is discussed in detail in N. Ferguson and V.
           Andreasen,
           pp 157-69 and MGM Gomes and GF Medley pp 171-192 both In
           "Mathematical
           Approaches for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious
           Diseases: Models, Methods, and Theory", C. Castillo-Chavez
           et al (Eds),
           Springer (2002).







           This e-mail is confidential to the intended recipient. If
           you have received it in error, please notify the sender and
           delete it from your system. Any unauthorized use,
           disclosure, or copying is not permitted. The views or
           opinions presented are solely those of the sender and do not
           necessarily represent those of the Public Library of Science
           unless otherwise specifically stated. Please note that
           neither the Public Library of Science nor any of its agents
           accept any responsibility for any viruses that may be
           contained in this e-mail or its attachments and it is your
           responsibility to scan the e-mail and attachments (if any).






